---
title: "2022-11-01"
date: 2022-11-01
---

# Heap Sort
[[CS404 - Algorithms/Algorithms/Heap Sort|Main Page]]


## Trees/Graphs
* A **free tree** is 
* A **rooted tree** is a tree in which a particular vertex is designated as the root.
* An **undirected graph** 
* A **forest** is an undirected graph without simple circuits
* **Parent**
* **Child**
* Vertices with the same parent are called **siblings**
* Ancestors of a vertex (other than the root) are the vertices in the path from the root to the vertex.
* The **descendants** of a vertex $v$ are those that have $v$ as an ancestor.
* A vertex of a tree is called a **leaf** if it has no children.
* Vertices that have children are called **intneral vertices**
* If $a$ is a vertex in a tree, the **subtree** with $a$ as its root is the subgraph of the tree consisting of $a$ and its descendants and all edges incident to these descendants.
* A rooted tree is called an $m$-ary tree if every internal vertex has *no more than* $m$ children.
	* The tree is called *full* if every internal vertex has *exactly* $m$ children.
* A **binary tree** is an $m$-ary tree with $m = 2$.
* An **ordered rooted tree** is a rooted tree where the children of each internal vertex are **ordered**.
	* Gharibi says we order in level-order, but there are different ordering strategies
* Left and right child
* The tree rooted at the left/right child are referred to as the left/right subtrees
* The **level** of a vertex $v$ in a rooted tree is the length of the unique path from the root to $v$.
* The **height** of a rooted tree is the maximum of the levels of vertices (the length of the longest path from the root to any vertex)
* A rooted $m$-ary tree of height $h$ is **balanced** if *all* leaves are at levels $h$ or $h-1$.
* There are at most $m^h$ leaves in an $m$-ary tree of height $h$.
	* Can we use this for unbalanced recursion trees?
	* If an $m$-ary tree of height $h$ has $l$ leaves, then $h \geq \lceil\log_m{l}\rceil$. If the mary tree is full and balanced, then $h = \lceil\log_m{l}\rceil$.
* A full m-ary tree with
	* n vertices has $i = \frac{n - 1}{m}$ internal vertices and $l = \frac{(m-1)n+1}{}$
* Theorem: A tree with $n$ vertices has $n-1$ edges.

# Midterm Logistics

* Everything covered up through today
	* Know how to order functions
	* Use logarithms to prove 
	* Solve the recurrence relation of an algorithm
		* [[CS404 - Algorithms/Divide and Conquer/Substitution Method]]
		* [[CS404 - Algorithms/Divide and Conquer/Recursion Tree Method]]
		* [[CS404 - Algorithms/Divide and Conquer/Master Theorem]]
* Assignment coming up (lasting rest of semester):
	* mention name of algorithm
	* definition
	* steps/pseudocode
	* stable or not
* Short-answer questions, 2-3 points
