---
title: "2022-11-17"
date: 2022-11-17
tags:
- lecture
- cs404
---

# Maximum Flow

A transport (...)
1. The **source** has no incoming edges.
2. The **sink** has no outgoing edges.
3. The weight $C_{ij} \geq 0$ of the directed edge $(i, j)$ is called the **capacity** of the edge.
4. The **flow** $F_{ij}$ on each edge does not exceed the capacity of the edge $C_{ij}$.
5. For every vertex $v$, the flow into $v$ equals the flow *out* of $v$ (conservation of flow).

Theorem:

Given some flow in a network, the flow out of the source $A$ equals the flow into the sink $Z$.
$$\Sigma_i{(F_{A_i})} = \Sigma_i{(F_{iZ})}$$

The [[CS404 - Algorithms/Algorithms/Ford-Fulkerson]] algorithm incrementally increases the value of a flow in stages, where at each stage some amount of flow is pushed along an augmenting path from the source to the sink.
* Initially, the flow of each edge is set to 0.
* At each stage, an augmenting path is computed and an amount of flow equal to the residual capacity is pushed along.
* The algorithm terminates when the current flow does not admit an augmenting path.

Analyzing Ford-Fulkerson is a little tricky, because the algorithm doesn't specify the exact method of *finding* augmenting paths. Poor choices can greatly reduce the algorithm's speed.

$O(f^* \cdot m)$, where $f^*$ is the maximum flow and $m$ is the number of edges.

# Minimum Spanning Tree

> [!WARNING] Final Exam
> 
> We'll need to use Prim's algorithm to find a minimum spanning tree on the final.


A **spanning tree** is a subet of a graph $G$ which has all the vertices covered with the minimum possible number of edges. Hence, a spanning tree *does not have cycles* and *it cannot be disconnected*.

By this definition, we can conclude that every connected, undirected graph $G$ has *at least one* spanning tree.

> [!NOTE]
> 
> A tree with $n$ vertices always has $n - 1$ edges.

> [!NOTE] Note
> 
> An acyclic graph is bipartite.
> 

A **minimum spanning tree** is a spanning tree with the lowest possible cost in a given graph.

[[CS404 - Algorithms/Algorithms/Kruskal's Algorithm]] works best when we have a **sparse** graph.

[[CS404 - Algorithms/Algorithms/Prim's Algorithm]] works best when we have a **dense** graph.