---
title: "2022-11-04"
date: 2022-11-04
tags:
- lecture
- cs441
---

# Logistics

**Exam**
* Know each different method of garbage collection and how it works
* Know what conservative compiler means

# Chapter 9 (cont.)
## Exceptions (cont.)

### Implementation

Obvious choice is a linked-list stack of exception handlers.
* When a protected block is entered, the handler for that block is pushed onto the *head* of the list.
* If an exception occurs, the runtime system pops the innermost handler off the list and calls it.

The issue with this approach is that we must manage the handler stack in every case, even though it isn't used in the common case.

Another approach is to produce contiguous blocks (more in slides)

## Coroutines

A **coroutine** is represented by a closure (code address & referencing environment) into which we can jump via a nonlocal `goto`. This is called a *transfer*.

When we transfer into a coroutine, the old program counter is saved.
* So if we perform a goto in the coroutine several times, each will start at the same location.
* If we transfer into the coroutine several times, each will start where the previous one left off.

This behavior is what gives us the `yield` generator behavior in Python.

All coroutines *exist* concurrently, but only one executes at a time. Transfer between coroutines is transferred explicitly by name.

They can be used to implement iterators and threads, and are also useful in their own right.

### Stack Allocation for Coroutines

```dialogue
< Why can't coroutines share a single stack?
> They don't execute LIFO
```
If all coroutines are at the same level of scope, then the stacks for each are totally disjoint.

This is tough - most languages let you increase the size of the one shared program stack, not allocate an arbitrary number of them! You can instead allocate stack frames from the heap, which avoids those problems.

If coroutines can be created at arbitrary levels of lexical nesting, a *cactus stack* occurs.

### Handling the Transfer

1. Change the program counter
2. Update the stack pointer
3. Change the contents of registers

The data structure handling these operations is called a *context block*.

## Events

An **event** is something that a running program must respond to, but occurs *outside* of the program at an *unpredictable* time.

Basic code often assumes I/O is synchronous and blocking; that is, it happens at a specified time and the program will wait for it to happen. That doesn't really work with GUI programs, however.

A better approach is setting up a handler, a special subroutine, to execute when a certain event occurs. This is called a **callback**.

# Chapter 10 - Data Abstraction & Object Orientation

[[CS441 - Programming Languages/10 - Data Abstraction and Object Orientation/|Index for Chapter 10]]

## Development

* Static 

Classes allow the programmer to define *families* of related abstractions
* Create and destroy routines typically exported from amodule become constructors and destructors for instances.
* Invoking a routine on a specific object type replaces calling a module sub

Classes build on modules by also providing *inheritance* and *dynamic method binding*.

Encapsulation, inheritance, and dynamic binding have their roots in [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/SIMULA]]. It was weak, however, in information hiding - this is where Clu, Modula, and Euclid made important contributions.

The first *fully* object-oriented language was [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/Smalltalk]], which used a message-based programming model.

## Object Oriented Programming

OO tries to enable safe code reuse by defining new abstractions as *extensions* or *refinements* of existing abstractions.

Most object-oriented languages have a keyword to refer to the object to which the currently executing method belongs. Things like `self`, `this`, etc.

Objects have **constructors** (called automatically when created) and generally at least *allow* a **destructor** (called automatically when objected is deleted or goes out of scope).

### Public vs. Private

The `public` label identifies methods that are available to other objects - parts of the interface that are exported from the class.

### Derived Classes

The constructor of the *parent* class has to be called first so that its information is set up and ready when the constructor of the *child* is called.

Cleanup should happen in reverse order, the child's destructor should be cleaned up before the parent's.

Child classes can shadow methods defined in the parent, original methods are typically still accessible with explicit scoping with something like `ParentClass::method()`.

### Classes and Generics

Say we have a `LinkedList` class, but we want it to contain multiple types.

```rust
struct Node<T> {
	value: T,
	next: Ref<Node<T>>
}
```
