---
title: "2022-11-02"
date: 2022-11-02
tags:
- lecture
- cs441
---

# Recap

Call by sharing[^1][^2] - very similar to pass by reference
* Differences are subtle

# Lecture

## Closures as Parameters
* **Closure**: a reference to a subroutine together with its referencing environment that can be passed as a parameter.
	* Needs referencing environment because if nested subroutines are allowed, we must ensure the environment available to the routine is the same as when it was called.
* Call by Name: A language must pass a closure whenever the eventual use of the parameter requires a particular referencing environment
	* Closures passed as parameters 
## Summary of Calling Methods

Don't have to memorize everything, but at least know the gist for the common languages

## Default (Optional) Parameters

Subroutine can always assume it has all of the parameters whether the caller provided them or not
* At compile time, any parameters not provided by the caller are plugged in by the compiler

## Named Parameters

Most languages consider parameters positionally.

## Variable Numbers of Arguments

```c
void printf(char* fstring, ...) {};
```

While this isn't type-safe for statically-typed languages, dynamically-typed languages like Common Lisp and scripting languages can manage variable numbers of arguments in a type-safe way.

## Function Returns

Early imperative languages would sometimes implement function returns by assigning a value to the *function name*.
* If some nested declaration farther down the line shadowed the function name, that function *would never be able to return!*

Functional languages consider the value of a function to be the value its body evaluates to, avoiding the problem entirely.

Go, in all its infinite wisdom, makes you declare a mutable variable at the start which is automatically returned at the end.

## Exceptions

### Exception Handling

**Exceptions** (introduced in [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/PL-I|PL-I]]) are *unexpected* runtime conditions. Sometimes the hardware will detect the exception directly, or the language/programmer can define scenarios where exceptions should be raised.

Three options:
1. Invent a value that can be used by the caller when the real value can't be returned.
2. Return an explicit "status" variable to the caller, who must check it to see if the value returned is good.[^3]
	* Status variables can be (and often *are*) ignored, add overhead, and clutter the program's control flow.
	* The tests have to be checked *every single time* even though they're almost always passed.
3. Rely on the caller to pass a closure for an error handling routine that can fire if there's a problem.

[[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/PL-I]]'s early implementation of exceptions was confusing and error-prone. These days, exception handlers are *lexically bound* to blocks of code and can propagate up the call stack.

Exception handlers should ideally try and compensate for the exception: clean up memory, close connections, etc., before continuing execution or re-raising the exception. Worst-case, the handler should *at least* print out an error message before crashing out.

### Defining Exceptions

*Dynamic semantic errors* are often predefined as exceptions.
* Arithmetic overflows, EOF, etc.

These can arise in totally valid programs, so they aren't fatal errors. Other errors may be inherently fatal, such as a function returning without a specified return value.

### Propagating Exceptions

Most languages allow exceptions to have a whole slew of handlers, which allows for programmers to define specialized subtype handlers. Exceptions are typically handled by the first handler that matches its type.

Most languages also allow a catch-all `final` clause that'll deal with any other exception regardless of type.

Concurrent programs have to consider what might happen if an exception propagates outside of the current thread[^4]. Different languages handle this in different ways, there's not an inherently obvious solution.

### Cleanup

If an exception propagates up the stack, the stack *unwinds*.

### Implementation


[^1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evaluation_strategy#Call_by_sharing
[^2]: https://pmg.csail.mit.edu/papers/thetaref/node34.html
[^3]: This chapter has a lot of Go slander, huh?
[^4]: Solution: don't write multithreaded programs. :)