---
title: "2022-11-07"
date: 2022-11-07
tags:
- lecture
- CS441
---

Continuing [[CS441 - Programming Languages/10 - Data Abstraction and Object Orientation/Object Orientation]]

# Encapsulation & Inheritance
 * [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/Euclid]] and [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/ML]] introduced *module types* whose implementation resembles a record.
	 * If all data in a module is of fixed size, then it can be assigned at a fixed offset within the record.
	 * If some isn't known until runtime, fixed data is allocated and a [[CS441 - Programming Languages/9 - Subroutines and Control Abstraction/Dope Vector]] is supplied for dynamic data.
	 * Modules share a single implementation of methods with the `this` parameter passed in implicitly.

# Classes

Object oriented languages have some additional issues that require changes to scoping rules.

Derived classes can *restrict* visibility, but never *increase* it.

# Variations

Different languages have different rules here.
* [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/Eiffel]] *does* allow derived classes to increase visibility of base class methods.
* [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/Python]] requires dunder notation to reach certain elements but nothing is truly 'private'
* In [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/Ruby]], everything is private.

# Inner Classes

If `Inner` is a member of `Outer`, can `Inner` see `Outer`'s  members? If so, which instances?

```python
class Outer:
	x = "some value"
	class Inner:
		def __init__(self):
			print(x)
```

# Extending Without Inheritance

What happens if inheritance isn't an option?
* [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/C-Sharp|C#]] provides *extension* methods, which give the *appearance* of extending a pre-existing class.
* Some scripting languages let the programmer add new methods to existing classes or individual objects.

# Initialization

Most OO languages provide some sort of method to initialize an object when it's first created. The language has already *allocated* that space, but the initializer, well, initializes it.
* Some languages also provide a *destructor* to allow the programmer to specify how an object should be cleaned up at the end of its lifetime.

Issues
* multiple constructors
* are variables references or values?
* runtime order of parent/child constructors and destructors
* if a class has members that are themselves classes, constructors of each member must be called

Some languages like [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/Smalltalk]], [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/Eiffel]], C++, [[CS441 - Programming Languages/Languages/C-Sharp]], and Java all allow more than one constructor for a class.

# References & Values

Some languages use variables that are *references* to objects. Others (C++, Ada) allow variables to have values that are *themselves* objects.
* With references, every variable *must* refer to something - no problem!
* With values, an object may need to be created at elaboration time.

Space for the temporary object is likely to be allocated at a statically known offset in the stack frame of the caller.

# Execution Order

An object *must* be initialized before it's used. Keep in mind the dependencies between parent and child - a parent's initialization routine *must* run before the child's.

# Garbage Collection

Children's destructors are called *before* their parent's. T

Storage management is often facilitated by *smart pointers*. Part of the destructor's routine involves smart pointers making sure nothing is left pointing to the object and only reclaiming storage if they're the last such pointer.

Languages with garbage collection often have less of a need for destructors.

# Dynamic Method Binding

Main: [[CS441 - Programming Languages/10 - Data Abstraction and Object Orientation/Dynamic Method Binding]].

**Liskov Substitution Principle**: An instance of some derived class $D$, provided it doesn't hide or alter any public methods of its parent class $P$, can be used in place of any instance of $P$.
* This is an instance of *subtype polymorphism*.

# Semantics & Performance

The problem with static binding is that it denies the child control over its own state.

If a function is passed a reference to a parent object and calls a method on that object, it should get the correct method call for the object that got passed.

This adds some runtime overhead in the form of a table-lookup. This isn't *much*, but can make a difference in performance-critical applications.

# Virtual Methods

**Virtual Methods** are a way for programmers to specify that particular methods should use dynamic binding. Calls to these virtual methods are [[CS441 - Programming Languages/10 - Data Abstraction and Object Orientation/Dynamic Dispatch|dispatched]] to the appropriate implementation at runtime.

# Abstract Methods

# Member Lookup

Static method binding allows the compiler to *always* tell which version of a method should be called depending on the type being used.

With [[CS441 - Programming Languages/10 - Data Abstraction and Object Orientation/Dynamic Method Binding]], the object referred to by the reference must have enough information to allow the code generated by the compiler to find the right version at runtime.

The most common method uses a [[CS441 - Programming Languages/10 - Data Abstraction and Object Orientation/Virtual Method Table]].


# Object Closures

# Mix-In Inheritance

# Interfaces

# Implementation

