---
title: "2022-10-31"
date: 2022-10-31
tags:
- lecture
- cs461
---

# Expert Systems

We've been talking about how to put together an [[CS461 - Artificial Intelligence/9 - Expert Systems/Expert Systems|Expert System]]
* This is a problem of [[CS461 - Artificial Intelligence/9 - Expert Systems/Knowledge Engineering]]
* It's hard for an expert to distill *why* they know something

## Types of Knowledge

* **Procedural**: what to do (rules, strategies)
* **Declarative**: facts, concepts
* **Meta-knowledge**: knowledge about knowledge
* **Heuristic knowledge**: rules of thumb
* **Structural knowledge**: rulesets, concept relations, how parts fit together

## Building a Knowledge System
Okay, how do we *build* knowledge systems?

* **Generate and Test**
* **Situation-Action Rules**
	* if-then
	* needs to be large enough to be meaningful, small enough to be managable
* **Domain-Specific Knowledge**
	* We need to know enough about the problem domain to actually produce results consistent with the space.
* **Flexibility of Knowledge Base**
* **Line of Reasoning**
	* Solution and strategies for producing it should make sense to an expert.
* **Multiple Sources of Knowledge**
	* Do we need auxiliary information unrelated to the task we're actually trying to solve?
* **Explainability**
	* Should be able to explain 


> [!NOTE] Paradox of Knowledge Engineering
> 
> The more competent the experts, the less likely they'll be able to *explain* how they came to a conclusion.
> 
> *further reading: page 271-277*

## Examples

* **DENDRAL**
* **MYCIN**
	* Issue: 400 rules - how do we figure out which one to apply next?
		* **Demon Rules** don't participate in the inference process, just monitor memory looking for some triggering condition. When a trigger is satisfied, the conclusion is placed into memory.
		* **Rete (net) algorithm** lets us do a quick search of the rules by taking advantage of some properties of the KB.
			* **Temporal Redundancy**
				* Firing a rule usually only changes facts
				* Any given fact is usually only affected by the same rules
				* We have an index, can only look at the things we know are affected
			* **Structural Similarity**
* **PROSPECTOR**
	* Fuzzy logic
	* First system to use [[CS461 - Artificial Intelligence/8 - Uncertainty/Bayes' Theorem]]

# Case-Based Learning

Looking at previous cases can help us develop *heuristics*, but we need to be careful about wh

How? Keep a data structure called a **case base** providing the following operations:
* Retrieve
* Reuse
* Revise
* Retain

*This is complex* - we need to decide what to store, how to store it, how to manage indices, etc.

What cases should we look at?
* **Goal-directed**: organize results partially by goal
* **Salient Features**: can we prioritize certain features?
	* example: in a medical diagnosis, try and identify people with similar symptoms.
* **Specific Features**: maybe we don't need to *prioritize* features, just count them.
* **Frequency**: are certain features occurring more frequently than others?
* **Recency**: have certain features been observed more recently than others?
* **Adaptibility**: maybe we should select the features that are easiest to change

Case-based systems aren't usually great at identifying *why* a particular case was chosen.