---
title: "2022-10-26"
date: 2022-10-26
tags:
- lecture
- CS461
---

# Independence
$$
P(A \wedge B) = P(A) \cdot P(B)
$$
$$
\begin{align*}
P(A \mid B) &= P(A)\\
P(B \mid A) &= P(B)
\end{align*}
$$

# Bayes' Theorem

Main page: [[CS461 - Artificial Intelligence/Uncertainty/Bayes' Theorem]]

$$
\begin{align*}
P(A \wedge B) &= P(A \mid B)P(B) = P(B \mid A)P(A)\\\\
\frac{P(A \mid B)P(B)}{P(A)} &= P(B \mid A)\\\\
&= \frac{P(A \mid B)P(B)}{P(A \mid B)P(B) + P(A \mid \neg{B})P(\neg{B})}
\end{align*}
$$

## Example

Consider the problem of a brain tumor and associated headaches.

* $P(BT) = \frac{1}{10,000}$
* $P(H \mid BT) = 0.78$
* $P(H \mid \neg{BT}) = \frac{1}{400}$

What's the probability of a brain tumor given severe headaches?
$$
\begin{align*}
P(BT \mid H) &= \frac{P(H \mid BT) \cdot P(BT)}{P(H \mid BT) \cdot P(BT) + P(H \mid \neg{BT}) \cdot P(\neg{BT})}\\\\
&= \frac{(0.78)(0.0001)}{(0.78)(0.0001) + (0.0025)(1 - 0.0001)}\\\\
&= \frac{0.000078}{0.002775}\\\\
&\approx 0.03 \text{ or 3}\\%
\end{align*}
$$

**Note**: this will be on a quiz, only need to get through step 2. #study

## Example 2

Pretend there are 20 potential terrorists in the country at any given moment.
* $P(T) = \frac{20}{300M} = 6.66 \cdot 10^{-8}$

What's the probability that someone *is* detected given they *are* a terrorist?
* $P(D \mid \neg{T})$

What's the probability that someone is *not* detected given they *are* a terrorist?
* $P(\neg{D} \mid T)$
* 
* $P(D \mid T) = 0.95$
* $P(\neg{D} \mid \neg{T})$

What's the overall probability that somebody is flagged regardless?
$$\begin{align*}
P(D) &= P(D \mid T) \cdot P(T) + P(D \mid \neg{T}) \cdot P(\neg{T})\\
&= (0.95)(6.66\cdot 10^{-8}) + (1-0.999)(1-6.66\cdot 10^{-8})\\
&< 0.00099999 + \dots\\
&\dots \text{ nearly 100}\\%
\end{align*}$$

# Enter: The Naive Idiot

Can we generalize [[CS461 - Artificial Intelligence/Uncertainty/Bayes' Theorem]] to multiple variables?

**Naive (Idiot) Bayes'**: we *assume* the variables are conditionally independent *even if that's not quite true*!
* Why? We can stand some minor inaccuracies.
* We know there will be some error, but *in some cases* a nearly-correct answer is better than no answer.

# Sources of Uncertainty

* **Frequentist View** ([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequentist_probability)): probabilities can be found by a repeatable, objective process.
	* Think law of large numbers
* **Objectivist View**: probability is a fundamental *property* of a thing.
* **Subjectivist View**: we can *decide* what is or isn't relevant on a case-by-case basis.

