---
title: "2022-10-28"
date: 2022-10-28
tags:
- lecture
- CS461
---

# Logistics

* **Midterm 2**
	* Monday November 7th
	* Chapters 5 - 9
	* [[CS461 - Artificial Intelligence/Midterm 2 Review]]

# Lecture

## Chapter 9 - Expert Systems

The first real use of AI

* Early uses
	* Seismographs used for oil detection

What makes somebody an expert?
* Practice
* Rules
* Analysis/conclusion
* Meta-knowledge (knowledge *about* knowledge)
* Explicit redundancies and constrants
	* Pattern recognitions

1. **Novice**
2. **Advanced Beginner**
3. **Competent**
	* starting to be able to recognize patterns
	* able to adjust what you're doing based on conditions
	* developing intuition, starting to get a feel for it
4. Proficient
	* Recognizes situation and best choices
	* Devises solution
5. Expert
	* "Just knows" what to do

Douglas Hofstadter - *Godel, Escher, Bach*
* argues that machines must recognize letters from their features (strokes, serifs, etc.) and not some holistic idea of similarity
* argues that computers can't generate fundamentally new examples


> [!QUOTE] An Eternal Golden Braid
> 
> Douglas Hofstadter argues that machines must recognize letters from their features (strokes, serifs, etc.) and not use holistic judgments of similarity.
> 
> *"Nobody can posess the 'secret recipe' from which all the (infinitely many) members of a category such as 'A' can in theory be generated. In fact, my claim is that no such recipe exists."*


* Humans can:
	* solve problems
	* explain problems and solutions
	* continue learning
	* restructure knowledge
	* adapt to new situations
	* break rules
	* know limitations
	* degrade gracefully
* Machines can

| | Humans | Machines |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| solve problems | x | x |
| explain problems and solutions | x | |
| continue learning | x | ? |
| restructure knowledge | x | |
| adapt to new situations | x | |
| break rules | x | |
| know limitations | x | x |
| degrade gracefully | x | x |

Expert systems have a few features that humans don't!
* Separate knowledge base from inference engine
* Uniform representation
* Inference engine - simple as possible
* Redudancy

Expert systems in general have *shallow* knowledge - a limited universe.
* Not generally able to generalize or deduce new knowledge
* Lack context: maybe they know the boiling point of water, but not that steam can drive turbines.

## So you want to build an expert system

1. Can the problem be solved easily with convential programming?
	* If so, don't use an expert system! Just solve it!
2. Is the domain well-bounded?
	* More sharply-defined domains are better. If solving a problem requiers knowledge of multiple domains, an expert system will be hard to construct.
3. Is there a need or desire for the system? (market)
4. Are one or more experts available?
5. Are decisions mostly heuristic?
	* Expert systems work best with inexact knowledge, uncertainty.
6. Can we handle some incorrectness/incompleteness/contradiction?
	* These systems will almost always give *some* answer, even if it's wrong.